1) File Commands:

ls – directory listing
ls -al – formatted listing with hidden files
cd dir - change directory to dir
cd – change to home
pwd – show current directory
mkdir dir – create a directory dir
rm file – delete file
rm -r dir – delete directory dir
rm -f file – force remove file
rm -rf dir – force remove directory dir *
cp file1 file2 – copy file1 to file2
cp -r dir1 dir2 – copy dir1 to dir2; create dir2 if it doesn't exist
mv file1 file2 – rename or move file1 to file2 if file2 is an existing directory, moves file1 into directory file2
ln -s file link – create symbolic link link to file
touch file – create or update file
cat > file – places standard input into file
more file – output the contents of file
head file – output the first 10 lines of file
tail file – output the last 10 lines of file
tail -f file – output the contents of file as it grows, starting with the last 10 lines

2) File Permissions:

chmod octal file – change the permissions of file to octal, which can be found separately for user, group, and world by adding:
4 – read (r)
2 – write (w)
1 – execute (x)
chmod 777 – read, write, execute for all
chmod 755 – rwx for owner, rx for group and world

3) System Info:

date – show the current date and time
cal – show this month's calendar
uptime – show current uptime
w – display who is online
whoami – who you are logged in as
finger user – display information about user
uname -a – show kernel information
cat /proc/cpuinfo – cpu information
cat /proc/meminfo – memory information
man command – show the manual for command
df – show disk usage
du – show directory space usage
free – show memory and swap usage
whereis app – show possible locations of app
which app – show which app will be run by default

4) Compression:

tar cf file.tar files – create a tar named file.tar containing files
tar xf file.tar – extract the files from file.tar
tar czf file.tar.gz files – create a tar with Gzip compression
tar xzf file.tar.gz – extract a tar using Gzip
tar cjf file.tar.bz2 – create a tar with Bzip2 compression
tar xjf file.tar.bz2 – extract a tar using Bzip2
gzip file – compresses file and renames it to file.gz
gzip -d file.gz – decompresses file.gz back to file

5) Shortcuts:

Ctrl+C – halts the current command
Ctrl+Z – stops the current command, resume with
fg in the foreground or bg in the background
Ctrl+D – log out of current session, similar to exit
Ctrl+W – erases one word in the current line
Ctrl+U – erases the whole line
Ctrl+R – type to bring up a recent command
!! - repeats the last command
exit – log out of current session

6) Working with Text

cat - creating and displaying text files
pager - view the contents, display one page of data at a time
head - display only the first few lines of a file
tail- display only the last few lines of a file, -n option is used with a number prefixed by the plus sign
pipe | - used to send the output of one command to another. 
sort -  used to rearrange the lines of files or input in either dictionary or numeric order.
	-t,	Specifies the comma character as the field delimiter
	-u      To sort and remove duplicates
	-k2	Sort by field #2
	-k1n	Numerically sort by field #1
	-k3	Sort by field #3
wc- counts the number of lines, words and bytes for a file, and a total line count if more than one file is specified. 
cut - extract columns of text from a file or standard input.
grep - used to filter lines in a file or the output of another command that matches a specified pattern
       -w option returns lines which contain matches that form whole words. 
fgrep - used to match literal characters, ignoring the special meaning of regular expression characters.
egrep - to use regular expressions
find - search in the directory specified and recursively search all of the subdirectories.
2>&1 - means "send the stderr (channel 2) to the same place where stdout (channel 1) is going".
tr -translates characters, but it only accepts data from stdin, never from a file name given as an argument.
more - displays one page of data at a time, spacebar to continue
less - display the entire contents of the file. Then search the file, use n to move forward, and N to move backwards and q to quit
grep -r pattern dir – search recursively for pattern in dir
command | grep pattern – search for pattern in the output of command
locate file – find all instances of file

7) Basic Scripting

./filename - to indicate that it should be run out of the current directory.
chmod - used to change the permissions of a file

Nano Editor:
  Ctrl + W	search the document
  Ctrl + W, then Control + R	search and replace
  Ctrl + G	show all the commands possible
  Ctrl + Y/V	page up / down
  Ctrl + C	show the current position in the file and the file’s size

Vi Editor:
vi editor has two modes: insert and command. 
Type an i to enter the “insert” mode of vi
Then press the Esc key to leave insert mode. Type :wq to write the file to disk and quit.
Key	Function
:x	Will save and close the file.
:wq	Will write to file and quit.
:wq!	Will write to a read-only file, if possible, and quit.
ZZ	Will save and close. Notice that no colon : is used in this case.
:q!	Exit without saving changes
:e!	Discard changes and reload file
:w!	Write to read-only, if possible.
j	Moves cursor down one line (same as down arrow)
k	Moves cursor up line (same as up arrow)
l	Moves cursor to the right one character (same as right arrow)
h	Moves cursor to the left one character (same as left arrow)
w	Moves cursor to beginning of next word
e	Moves cursor to end of word
b	Moves cursor to beginning of previous word
$	Moves cursor to end of current line (same as End key)
0       Moves cursor beginning of current line (same as Home key)
3G	Jumps to third line (nG jumps to the nth line)
1G	Jumps to first line
~	changes letter to lower case
Shift+G	Jumps to the last line
dw - to delete word
u - to undo last operation
xxxx - to delete 4 characters
4u - to undo last 4 operations
dd - delete current line
p - Whatever was lasted deleted or yanked can be “pasted”.
J - Join two lines, the current and the next
yw - copy the current word
o - insert blank line below current line

echo $? - After a program runs, be it a binary or a script, it returns an exit code which is an integer between 0 and 255. 
an exit code of 0 means “everything is OK”. Any exit codes greater than 0 mean some kind of error happened, which is specific to the program.


8) Hardware

arch - family the CPU of the current system belongs to
lscpu - For more information concerning the CPU
free -  view the amount of RAM in your system, including the swap space
  -m option to force the output to be rounded to the nearest megabyte (MB) 
  -g option to force the output to be rounded to the nearest gigabyte (GB)
lspci - view what devices are connected to the PCI bus
lsusb - list the USB connected devices
ps - shows the current processes running in the current shell
ps aux/-ef - To be able to view all processes on the system 
jobs - to view all running jobs
top – display all running processes
kill %3 - using the job number, stop the last ping 
killall ping - stop all of the ping commands
kill pid – kill process id pid
killall proc – kill all processes named proc *
bg – lists stopped or background jobs; resume a stopped job in the background
fg – brings the most recent job to foreground
fg n – brings job n to the foreground

System logs are stored in the /var/log directory

9) Users & Groups

getent - show you both local and network-based groups.
groupadd - executed by the root user to create a new group
   -g : specify group id 
groupmod - used to either change the name of a group 
    -n : change group name
    -g : change the GID for the group 
    -nogroup : To search for all files that are owned by just a GID (not associated with a group name)
groupdel - to delete a group
useradd - to create user account
passwd - either set the initial password or change the password for the account.
usermod - modifying an existing user account
	-c	COMMENT	Sets the value of the GECOS or comment field to COMMENT.
	-d HOME_DIR	--home HOME_DIR	Sets HOME_DIR as a new home directory for the user.
	-e EXPIRE_DATE	--expiredate EXPIRE_DATE	Set account expiration date to EXPIRE_DATE.
	-f INACTIVE	--inactive INACTIVE	Set account to permit login for INACTIVE days after password 						expires.
	-g GROUP	--gid GROUP	Set GROUP as the primary group.
	-G GROUPS	--groups GROUPS	Set supplementary groups to a list specified in GROUPS.
	-a	--append	Append the user's supplemental groups with those specified by the -G option.
	-h	--help	Show the help for the usermod command.
	-l NEW_LOGIN	--login NEW_LOGIN	Change the user's login name.
	-L	--lock	Lock the user account.
	-s SHELL	--shell SHELL	Specify the login shell for the account.
	-u NEW_UID	--uid NEW_UID	Specify the user's UID to be NEW_UID.
	-U	--unlock	Unlock the user account.
userdel - used to delete users

10) Network Configuration

ifconfig - stands for interface configuration and is used to display network configuration information (deprecated in some Linux distributions)
ip addr show - displays network configuration details
route - To view a table that describes where network packages are sent
netstat -  used to display information about network connections as well as display the routing table.commonly used to display open ports.
     -t  :limits the listing to TCP ports
     -l : limits the output to ports with listening services
     -n : shows the network addresses numerically:
ss - show socket statistics and supports all the major packet and socket types
host - works with DNS to associate a hostname with an IP address or vice versa
ping host – ping host and output results
whois domain – get whois information for domain
dig domain – get DNS information for domain
dig -x host – reverse lookup host
wget file – download file
wget -c file – continue a stopped download
ssh user@host – connect to host as user
ssh -p port user@host – connect to host on port port as user
ssh-copy-id user@host – add your key to host for user to enable a keyed or passwordless login

The primary configuration file for an IPv4 network interface is the /etc/sysconfig/network-scripts/ifcfg-eth0 file.
the primary IPv6 configuration file is the same file where IPv4 configuration is stored; the /etc/sysconfig/network-scripts/ifcfg-eth0 file. If you want to have your system have a static IPv6 address, add the following to the configuration file:

IPV6INIT=yes
IPV6ADDR=<IPv6 IP Address>
IPV6_DEFAULTGW=<IPv6 IP Gateway Address>
If you want your system to be a DHCP IPv6 client, then add the following setting:

DHCPV6C=yes
You also need to add the following setting to the /etc/sysconfig/network file:

NETWORKING_IPV6=yes
